[Music]
Bloomberg Audio Studios podcasts, radio,
news.
[Music]
[Applause]
>> Hello and welcome to another episode of
the Odd Thoughts podcast. I'm Tracy
Aloway
>> and I'm Joe Weisenthal.
>> Joe, you wrote a good newsletter this
week.
>> Thank you. Thank you for saying that.
>> Just just that one. I wrote a good
newsletter this week. No, but
interesting week because obviously
there's for months, you know, talk about
Fed independence. Would President Trump
try to fire Jerome Powell? All of these
uh different questions. It's heating up.
This is a very difficult topic to talk
about podcast-wise because there's
always that chance that, you know, we
record something on Fed Independence and
by the time the episode is produced and
edited, something new has happened. So
very dicey, but you know, we're hoping
that in the next short period of time
this holds. But yes, this is a really
important story.
>> We're recording this on July 18th, and I
think the ambition is to get it out on
July 19th. So hopefully nothing changes
that quickly, but of course, you never
know. And just this week, we have had
these back and forth headlines. We had a
report that Trump was considering firing
pal sort of imminently, and then he came
out at a press conference and said, "No,
he wasn't."
>> Yeah. And he said there was a report
that there was a literal letter that was
signed. Other people affiliated in the
administration have been hammering
Powell. Some on related to monetary
policy, some relating to the cost of
renovations of the Federal Reserve
offices. The criticism is of course uh
getting intense. Anyway, I've been
trying to learn more about this question
of Fed independence. I came across a lot
of the research that was done by uh
economist Carol Binder which I thought
was interesting which talks about how
Fed independence is this cherished idea
in economics but it's not just about the
idea of whether the Fed is legally
independent pressure on the Fed itself
even if the Fed doesn't necessarily
react just the rhetoric against the Fed
and central banks around the world not
the Fed specifically but central banks
around the world just the rhetoric and
the pressure the perception that the
central bank is losing independence can
have macroeconomic effects.
>> Yeah. And despite some people cherishing
that independence, we know from a lot of
recent events, the rise of populism
around the world that it seems a lot of
people don't like unelected bureaucrats.
Just put it that way. Okay. So, we
actually have Carol here. She is of
course the associate professor of
economics in the school of civil
leadership at UT Austin. Carol,
>> welcome. Hum.
Carola, thank you so much for coming on
OddLots.
>> Yeah, thanks so much for having me.
Excited to be here.
>> Do you just want to give us a maybe a
summary of your previous work and why
you got interested in the subject of
central bank independence in the first
place?
>> Sure. Yeah. I mean, the paper that was
mentioned in the newsletter is one
called political pressure on central
banks. And in that work, I really wanted
to understand this distinction between
legal central bank independence, which
we know has been rising around the world
for the past couple of decades, versus
actual or de facto central bank
independence. because it seems like even
when the central bank does have legal
protections that kind of insulate the
bank from politics, there's still always
going to be um reason for politicians to
try to convince the central bank to do
what they want. I mean, that's the whole
reason why we have legal protections on
central bank independence. So, it's kind
of hard to measure that. Uh what I ended
up doing with the help of a couple of
research assistants was reading through
these reports by economist intelligence
unit that come out every quarter for
basically every country and just seeing
whenever there was a mention of some
kind of political pressure on the
central bank. And we tried to record
whether it was pressure for easier or
looser monetary policy and also whether
the central bank resisted the pressure
or succumbed to it. And then once we had
this new data set about all of these
instances, at least all the known
instances of pressure on central banks,
then I was able to use that to say,
well, what happens afterwards,
especially to inflation. And as Joe
said, if the central bank succumbs to
the pressure, it's almost always
pressure for looser monetary policy. So,
so that's certainly followed by higher
inflation. But even if they try to
resist,
>> inflation still rises. Just not not as
much, but it still rises. So my, you
know, interpretation there is that it
probably has something to do with
expectations. So people start at least
worrying that there's a chance that the
central bank is going to give into those
pressures. They know that if they do
that'll be inflationary. So inflation
expectations rise right now and that
makes inflation itself start to rise.
Also
>> to back up for a second, I described in
the intro central bank independence one
of these sort of very cherished ideas
and perceived as extremely important.
What do you describe like why why is
this actually because as Tracy mentioned
there's a lot of people who find it
distasteful that there are entities
within any government that aren't
directly democratically accountable.
What is it about central bank
independence that is perceived by
economists to be such a such a goal so
to speak?
>> So the way I see it is two main parts.
One is that there is a natural
inflationary bias in monetary policy. So
meaning if you had monetary policy
controlled by elected politicians, they
would always have this concern about the
next election. They always want to make
the public happy in the short term. So
they're going to tend towards juicing
the economy um even if in the longer run
that's going to cause inflation. So in
equilibrium you're always running
monetary policy to loose and getting too
much inflation. That happens if you
don't have an independent central bank.
So if elected officials are controlling
monetary policy. The other side of it is
think about the distinction between
fiscal policy and monetary policy. So
having independent central banks is very
common. having independent fiscal
authorities is not and the usual
justification there is that fiscal
policy has very obvious distributional
consequences I mean that's basically the
point of fiscal policy in some sense
like you want maybe you want progressive
taxes you want to spend on certain
groups of people you want to tax certain
activities and so that's inherently
about distribution which is something
that you really want to be a political
decision you want like the voters to
decide about what kind of distribution
they want. Monetary policy on the other
hand is thought of as being a lot more
even, right? It affects the macroeconomy
more than it affects distribution. So in
that way, it's like kind of more
acceptable in a democracy to delegate it
to some technocrats. That's kind of the
like traditional case, but of course
that's been very much challenged,
especially when the Fed during the
financial crisis started doing more
unconventional monetary policies. Those
did have distributional consequences.
They're kind of hard to measure, but
they're there. And even conventional
monetary policy, like inflation is going
to hurt some people more than others.
Having a a weak labor market is going to
hurt some people more than others. So I
think people do partly get dissatisfied
with central bank independence when they
realize that whatever the Fed is doing I
think maybe hurts them more than it
hurts others or that they didn't have
any say in in that kind of decision
which it is political inflation is
political and and monetary policy is
too.
>> You just reminded me on the topic of a
natural bias towards loosening of
monetary policy and therefore inflation.
Do you ever get governments trying to uh
pressure for higher interest rates? I
feel like I can't come up with a single
example.
>> Well, it might not be obviously for
higher interest rates, but one of the
few examples in that paper that I found
of pressure for tighter monetary policy
was in the US after the financial crisis
when the Fed was doing so much QE. Um, a
lot of Republicans in Congress
especially were worried that that was
going to be very inflationary. So they
were pressuring the Fed to cut back on
the QE or not do so much monetary
easing.
>> Those were wild times when we when a lot
of people, myself included, probably
thought QE was going to be inflationary.
>> Yeah. Or people thought it was going to
be hyperinflationary. The more cynical
interpretation, by the way, is not that
Republicans thought that, and this is
just the cynical interpretation. I'm not
even saying I'm going to say this, but
not that they were worried about
inflation, but that they didn't want the
economy to recover particularly rapidly
under a Democratic president. Again,
different perceptions of what their
motivations are. Okay. One of the things
people say, and you talk to like veteran
people on Wall Street and they're like,
they've always done this. This is
nothing new in this country. Every
president has in some way tried to
pressure their central banker typically
for easing in some way. And I think
there's all there are certainly examples
of that without question. How novel and
different when we talk about they're
attacking him over the cost of
renovations. They're directly saying cut
300 basis points in a tweet, etc. Does
this feel like a meaningful step up in
the level of pressure that we've
historically seen in the US?
Yeah, I think the meaningful difference
is that it's so public now and so
obvious where it used to be like there
was this protocol, right, that the
president might want lower interest
rates. They might want easier monetary
policy, but they're not going to say so
out loud. There was a lot of just
careful procedure around it. So, the
fact that it's really really like a
public spectacle now is a difference. It
does, I think, further politicize the
Fed because now the general public sees
the president tweeting about the Fed and
depending on whether they support the
president or not, they might be more
angry at the Fed or more defensive of
the Fed. So, it really makes it public
in a way that is that is pretty new.
But, I mean, I do get the point that
there is always this pressure on the
Fed, always from within Congress, too.
You've had criticism of the Fed, which
coming from Congress, it's a bit more
appropriate than from the president
because the Fed is accountable to
Congress. So, it kind of makes more
sense that you would you would see a lot
of criticism of the Fed coming from
Congress because that's more their role.
>> They have the monetary power that
they've delegated to the Fed,
>> right? I know you're not in the sort of
market coal mines on a daily basis, but
I'm hoping I'm hoping you may
nevertheless have an opinion on this
because one of the weird things that
happened this week when all the
headlines about Trump possibly firing
Pal started to fly around was the
biggest reaction in the market seemed to
be in the dollar in the US currency and
we actually didn't see that much
movement in yields at least going up
like they didn't start surging. So, I
guess I'm curious if your thesis holds
that any type of pressure tends to be
inflationary because it boosts
perceptions of inflation, why wouldn't
we have seen an upward rise in yields,
that reaction this week?
>> Well, it's it's not that any type of
pressure is inflationary. It's that on
average across all of these hundreds of
data points I was looking at, on
average, pressure was inflationary. this
particular case could be very different.
I think partly because there's so much
so much uncertainty about what is Trump
actually going to do. It's hard to even
follow the news here where he says he's
going to fire Powell or no, he didn't,
you know, so any kind of announcement
you get, I think the markets don't know
exactly how to take it right away. And
some of the news, right, like was
already kind of baked in. Like we've
known for a couple of months that
President Trump was having this conflict
with Chairman Powell. So maybe these
most recent announcements are not really
that much new news.
[Music]
Has
the damage already been done? This is
the sort of question that I'm wondering
about, which is that okay, pressure has
existed to some extent forever. It's
become much more of a public spectacle.
It's become much more aggressive, etc.
There is this I would say safe
assumption that Paul doesn't have that
much longer in his term but that the
assumption is that the next Fed chair
will be some sort of capital L loyalist
to Trump that there will be alignment. I
forget who it was on TV talking about we
need a new Fed Treasury accord. So would
you say like to some extent that the
glass has been broken here or the glass
has been cracked and that the damage has
been done even if the Fed legally
retains its existing structure that the
Fed going forward will not be the same
independent Fed will not be as
independent as we've had for the last
several decades.
>> Yes, I think that the damage to the
perception of the Fed's independence has
already been done. There are really big
political divides in how people perceive
the Fed. The kind of tradition that one
president would reappoint the previous
president's Fed chair even if they were
from a different political party. I
think that that tradition probably is
over.
>> Yeah. Kind of like Supreme Court
nominations which used to fly through
now are entirely done on political like
the votes and this confirmation votes
are completely political now.
>> Yeah. But I would say it's not just the
fault of Trump since his election, the
since his most recent election. It's not
just that. It's also what was happening
during the pandemic and during the high
inflation episode in 2021 and 2022 that
did a lot of damage as well because
there was so much on both sides of
trying to like place the blame and
saying was everything the Fed's fault,
was everything the fault of the fiscal
stimulus? Was it transi? Was inflation
transitory or permanent? That really got
things more politicized then and that's
only been exacerbated by the past couple
months. So,
>> one of the other narratives that I've
seen this week is this idea that okay,
even if Trump fired Pal and put in place
someone who would immediately push for
lower interest rates, you wouldn't
necessarily get them a because of the
market expectations which you just
described. So people might start pricing
in higher inflation expectations which
would move the curve up or steepen the
curve
>> but also because it's not just the Fed
chair making decisions. It's a committee
and Trump might not be able to influence
the entire committee. How do you take
into account I guess the rest of the
FOMC members? How do they play into this
type of political pressure?
>> Yeah. So it is monetary policy by
committee and different under different
fed chairs the kind of committee
decision-m has differed a little just
the norms around it. So whether they
like kind of how strong the fed chair
was and making sure that everyone would
come to a consensus versus allowing some
more disagreement to be public. But
yeah, I think the fact that I mean the
fact that the members of the committee
have these overlapping terms and pretty
long-term lengths is part of what gives
it independence because it means we
don't have a complete turnover of the
committee in at any given point in time.
And there's going to be a lot of
continuity there because of that
institutional structure. Especially if
you get a Fed chair that's kind of
external, that's viewed as a loyalist,
the rest of the committee may be quite
reluctant to just go along with whatever
the new Fed chair says if they don't
feel like it's the right decision. The
Fed, they emphasize all the time that
they're data dependent, and I think
that's the line that a lot of committee
members would keep using. The
unfortunate thing is we don't know
exactly in what sense they are data
dependent. like they don't publish a
monetary policy rule that they follow,
but they say that they they take into
account not just the PCE inflation rate
and the unemployment rate, but all all
sorts of other indicators about where
the economy is headed and they they
react to all of those. So, so they would
I'm pretty sure most of the committee
would try to just stick to the course
that they're on even if there were a new
chair in place. It would be really
interesting because dissents are very
rare and you know sometimes you get a
lot of times you get no descent
sometimes you get one very rarely you
get two in the last in my career I can't
remember any decision in the US that I
think ever got more than two descents it
would be interesting if that norm were
broken where the fed really does not
control or have basically get to guide
the committee on their preferred path I
want to though like talk about in the
broad research globally Establishing a
central independent central bank is
politically difficult and some countries
attempt to do it by simply outsourcing
their monetary policy to the Federal
Reserve itself by setting up a dollar
peg or currency board or something like
that because they don't even have the
sort of political capacity to establish
a truly independent central bank. What
are the patterns you see around the
world? But I'm curious if in your
research when pressure builds on a
central bank, is it usually sort of a
symptom of a broader domestic political
disintegration that's happening where
just all kinds of norms are being
violated or all kinds of structures are
sort of collapsing or deteriorating in
some way?
>> Yeah. Well, to the the part about how
the central bank independence is set up,
sometimes it's because there's already a
very strong preference in that country
for lower inflation. So they so then
it's kind of easier to set up an
independent central bank because they
really want low inflation and they're
committed to it which is why it's so
hard in the research to say the central
bank independence actually lower
inflation because you you have like a
reverse causality.
>> Yeah.
>> So sometimes that's how it gets set up.
Sometimes it's imposed by like the IMF
saying you know if you want to keep
having our support there's some things
you need to do and one of them is set up
a independent central bank. But then the
part about like when do politicians
start pressuring the central bank? When
does that really build up? Yeah, I mean
there was a lot more of the pressure on
the central banks around around crisis
times. So I think the financial crisis
did erode a lot of trust in institutions
and made it more
>> acceptable to pressure central banks.
Also during the 2010s when inflation was
really low that made it seem more like
okay having higher inflation doesn't
necessarily seem like so much of a
threat. What we really want is to boost
the labor markets at least in in certain
countries. So then there was more
pressure on the central banks that way.
The other thing is also like the fiscal
situation. So if there's big big debts
to finance, right? And then there's
going to be often pressure for the lower
interest rates or to monetize the debt.
>> Tracy, by the way, just as we're
recording this headline from the AP, all
this stuff about criticism of the Fed,
it turns out Chris Rugerberg, Josh Boke
of the AP reporting much of these costs
were associated in 2020 with Trump
officials demanding that there be more
marble at the Fed instead of glass. So,
a new wrinkle to the cost of these
office constructions. Anyway,
>> you got to have that marble.
>> Trump loves marble.
>> Marble and gold. He does have a very
Louis the 15th style, I guess, taste in
in interior design. Anyway,
>> maybe we should do an interior design.
Yeah,
>> I would like that.
>> Okay. Anyway, on a serious note, given
those concerns around trusting unelected
bureaucrats and the idea that maybe, you
know, central banks started to overstep
their traditional roles post 2008 or
something like that,
>> what's the best way of I guess ensuring
that central banks are in some way
answerable to the electorate or in some
way, you know, there's accountability
there without sacrificing that
independence.
>> Yeah, I mean this is a really important
topic to me and something I focus a lot
on in my book and in some of my other
research, but I think that making sure
that the role of the Fed or the central
bank is limited to something like price
stability and having a lot of
transparency about how they're achieving
that is really important. So the Fed has
a dual mandate. Having the price
stability and the employment side of the
mandate gives them a lot of discretion
because sometimes those two goals can
come into conflict and then they need to
just decide well what are we going to
prioritize right now. The more
discretion that unelected technocrats
have, the more room there is for people
to try to pressure them one way or the
other. In my book, I advocate for a
nominal GDP or a nominal income target,
which I think would help them achieve
both parts of that dual mandate, but
with a single target that they're going
after. And then it makes it really clear
at any given point of time. Do they need
tighter or looser monetary policy and
there's not as much like wiggle room? It
makes it easier for them to justify
their actions and for the public to say,
well, are they doing what they say
they're going to do or not? versus if
you have an inflation target and kind of
full employment target then you can
always argue kind of for either way and
yeah so just keeping the role more
limited not lately but before co there
was a lot more pressure on central banks
to do even more beyond those kind of two
parts of the dual mandate to take on
climate change and inequality
>> and issues like that and I think that
those are important
things that somebody needs to do, but
it's not really the job of the Fed
because they're not elected to do that
and those kinds of political topics need
to be addressed by elected officials.
One of the funny things I used to think
in the 2010s is that had the Fed only
had a single mandate, it's not it's
conceivable to me that policy would have
been looser if they were continuing to
fail on its inflation target from the
downside in those days that uh you know
they continued to miss that 2% had they
had a nominal GDP target, a nominal
income target solely. It's possible
actually that they might have achieved
the employment part of the mandate
sooner because it would be so sufficient
that they were failing to hit that
target. Anyway, Carol Binder, really
appreciate you coming on. I'm I'm
finding your research to be uh very
fascinating. Happy to have dived into
it. So, thank you so much for coming on.
>> Thank you.
[Music]
Joe, obviously a very timely episode to
get out. I do think the question you
asked about whether or not attacks on
central bank independence might be part
of a broader deterioration in norms and
what's deemed acceptable by society and
political society. There is an element
of that like it it does feel like that.
No, like I think so. Like I think if you
were to look around the world and you
were to say find those examples where
there is a lot of pressure or stress on
central banks, I think almost always you
would find it associated with other
things happening in politics that are
sort of you know the wheels are coming
off in some way. Turkey strikes me as a
great example. A country where the sort
of like democratic norms have eroded
over time. Certainly over the last 20
years many would say and which gets to
this whole idea which Carola talked
about causality is often hard to
establish. So you can point to on the
line that this pressure on a central
bank or central bank independence period
associated with this or that inflation.
But whether that's because the pressure
or because many bad things are going on
at the time, it's hard to disentangle.
>> Absolutely. But I guess her broad
conclusion that on average this type of
political pressure does lead to higher
inflation expectations like it does
suggest that if your ambition is lower
rates then maybe this doesn't help.
>> I mean here's the thing we are almost
certainly going to get a Fed chair
sometime in the next year. Whether it's
because Paulo has been removed from his
term prematurely or just because at the
end uh the next central banker is
perceived as a President Trump loyalist,
there is probably going to be a
meaningful difference in the the
reaction function of the Fed toward
faster impulse to cut. Very naturally
people can assume therefore that the
future would be all things equal more
inflationary.
>> Ah very naturally the natural rate will
go up. Okay, shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there. This has been
another episode of the All Thoughts
podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You can
follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Jill Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Carola Binder. She's consis. Follow our
producers Carmen Rodriguez at Carmen
Dash Bennett at Dashbot and Kalebrooks
at Kalebrooks. For more OddLots content,
go to bloomberg.com/odlotss
where we have a daily newsletter and all
of our episodes. And you can chat about
all of these topics 247 in our Discord.
discord.gg/odlots.
>> And if you enjoy OddLots, if you want
Joe to run for the next Fed chair, then
please leave us a positive review on
your favorite podcast platform. And
remember, if you are a Bloomberg
subscriber, you can listen to all of our
episodes absolutely adree. All you need
to do is find the Bloomberg channel on
Apple Podcast and follow the
instructions there. Thanks for
listening.
[Music]
Yeah.
Woo.
[Music]